Python Program: Reverse a Three-Digit Number

Program

num = int(input(“Enter a three digit number:”))

d1 = num % 10 # last digit num = num // 10

d2 = num % 10 # middle digit d3 = num // 10 # first digit

reverse = d1 * 100 + d2 * 10 + d3

print(“Reversed number:”, reverse)

Example

Input : 123 Output : 321

Explanation

The program separates each digit using modulus (%) and integer division
(//). After extracting the digits, it rebuilds the number in reverse
order.

ALGORITHMS AND DATA STRUCTURES

Algorithm

An algorithm is a sequence of well-defined steps used to solve a problem
or complete a specific task in programming.

Examples: - Sorting numbers - Searching for an item in a list -
Calculating factorial - Finding the largest value in an array

Data Structures

A data structure is a method of organizing and storing data so that it
can be accessed and modified efficiently.

Examples: - Array - Linked List - Stack - Queue - Tree - Graph

TYPES OF DATA STRUCTURES

1. Primitive Data Structures

Primitive structures are the basic data types provided by a programming
language.

Examples: Integer Float Character String Boolean

2. Non‑Primitive Data Structures

These structures are more complex and are built using primitive data
types.

They are divided into two types:

A)  Linear Data Structures Data elements are arranged in a sequential
    order.

Examples: Array Linked List Stack Queue

B)  Non‑Linear Data Structures Data elements are arranged in
    hierarchical or interconnected form.

Examples: Tree Graph

BIG O NOTATION

Big O notation is used to represent the efficiency of an algorithm. It
describes how the running time or memory usage increases as the input
size becomes larger.

Example: A program may behave differently when processing 10 inputs
compared to 1,000,000 inputs.

TYPES OF COMPLEXITY

1. Time Complexity

Time complexity measures the amount of time an algorithm takes to
execute.

Example: Program A runs in 30 seconds Program B runs in 60 seconds

Program A is considered more efficient.

2. Space Complexity

Space complexity refers to the amount of memory required by an algorithm
while it is running.

PERFORMANCE CASES OF ALGORITHMS

Best Case The minimum time required by the algorithm.

Average Case The typical time taken by the algorithm during normal
execution.

Worst Case The maximum time the algorithm may take to finish.

COMMON BIG O NOTATIONS

O(1) Constant Time O(n) Linear Time O(n²) Quadratic Time O(log n)
Logarithmic Time O(2ⁿ) Exponential Time

Other notations:

Big Omega (Ω) → Best case complexity Big Theta (Θ) → Average case
complexity

RULES FOR MEASURING COMPLEXITY

Rule 1

A single assignment or basic operation takes constant time.

Example: a = 5

Complexity: O(1)

Rule 2

A loop that runs from 0 to n has linear complexity.

Example:

for i in range(n): print(i)

Complexity: O(n)

Rule 3

Nested loops produce quadratic complexity.

Example:

for i in range(n): for j in range(n): print(i, j)

Complexity: O(n²)

Rule 4

If the variable is divided by 2 in each iteration, the complexity
becomes logarithmic.

Example:

n = 16

while n > 1: print(n) n = n // 2

Complexity: O(log n)

Rule 5

If operations occur one after another, their complexities are added.

Example:

for i in range(n): print(i)

for j in range(n): print(j)

Total Complexity: O(n)

COMMON QUESTIONS

1. Difference Between Big O and Big Omega

Big O (O) Represents the worst‑case complexity of an algorithm.

Big Omega (Ω) Represents the best‑case complexity of an algorithm.

2. Difference Between Linear and Non‑Linear Data Structures

Linear Data Structures Data elements are arranged sequentially.

Examples: Array Stack Queue

Non‑Linear Data Structures Data elements are organized in hierarchical
or network structures.

Examples: Tree Graph

3. Why O(log n) Complexity Occurs

Logarithmic complexity occurs when the input size is reduced by half
during each iteration.

Example Code

n = 64

while n > 1: print(n) n = n // 2

Sequence: 64 → 32 → 16 → 8 → 4 → 2 → 1

Number of steps ≈ log₂ n

4. Grid Traversal Complexity

If two loops iterate over height (h) and width (w):

for i in range(h): for j in range(w): print(i, j)

Time Complexity = O(h × w)
